# AEP : ArmoniK's Domain Definition

|                   |ArmoniK Enhancement Proposal|
---:                |:---
**AEP**             | 
**Title**           | ArmoniK's Domain Definition
**Author**          | Italo Aguiar <<iaguiar@aneo.fr>>, Quentin Delamea <<qdelamea@aneo.fr>>
**Status**          | Draft
**Type**            | Standard
**Creation Date**   | 2024-06-04

# Abstract

This AEP proposes a comprehensive definition of ArmoniK's domain. A domain is an area of interest or control within our system. Our goal is to clearly define the core domain entities to facilitate further development.

# Motivation

The purpose of this document is to establish a clear and consistent definition of ArmoniK's domain, enabling other documents and standards to effectively reuse these concepts.

# Rationale

To describe more complex features of ArmoniK accurately, it is crucial to have a shared vocabulary and avoid redundancy. While some definitions already exist in the ArmoniK glossary, this AEP seeks to foster community discussion and approval to ensure a unified understanding and usage of these terms.

# Specification

## Worker

User-developed containerized software capable of performing one or several user-implemented tasks. A worker is built on top of a uniformized runtime environment. A worker process input data, outputing more data from its calculation, as while as it can produce new tasks that might be handled by itself or by different workers. A worker embeds an implementation of the communication protocols with the scheduling agent.

## Scheduling agent

Containerized software cohabiting with a worker, running a specific algorithm to determine which tasks its associated workers should perform, scheduling tasks on the workers and monitoring their execution. It also manages all interactions between the worker and the databases (retrieving/saving data, creating new tasks, etc.), as well as managing workers errors and retrying/resubmitting failed tasks when necessary. A scheduling agent, like a worker, exists within a single partition.

## Partition

Logical segmentation of the cluster's pool of machines to distribute workloads according to usage. This feature is provided and handled by ArmoniK.

## Task

An atomic computation that takes one or several inputs and outputs one or several results. A task is launched by a client or by another task and processed by a worker. In ArmoniK, tasks cannot communicate with each other. They can, however, depend on each other via their input/output data, known as data dependency. 

A task is defined by:

- **TaskOptions**: Set of parameters specifying the execution conditions, for instance:
    - *PartitionId*: The Id of the partition where the task must be executed
    - *Maximum Duration*: The maximum duration of a task
    - *Max Retries*: The maximum number of retries 
    - *Priority*: The priority level of the task execution (the algorithm performs its best effort on tasks' priorities; however, it is possible that the priority won't always be respected)

- **Data Dependencies**: Input data for a given task that depends on another unique task. Data dependencies formalize dependencies between tasks.

- **Expected Outputs**: Data that must be generated as output from a task. If a task submits new tasks then it can transfer responsibility for generating all or part of its outputs to the tasks it submits.

## Blob 

Abstraction for ArmoniK's task-related data, including data dependencies and expected outputs. 

- **Blob Metadata**: Abstraction for referring to a blob, whether it exists or not. Blob metadata might be used when referring to data that is expected to exist in its full form in the future, such as expected outputs or data dependencies before the blob content is created.

## Session

A session is a logical container for tasks and associated data (task status, blobs, errors, etc.). Every task is submitted within a session. An existing session can be resumed to retrieve data or submit new tasks. When a session is canceled, all associated executions still in progress are interrupted.

## Events

Events are abstractions that enable users to be notified whenever a change happens to certain entities, for example: sessions, tasks, and blobs, which must be specified by users.

## Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.